### Teaching Philosophy:  
I'm often asked about my "teaching philosophy" or for tips on how to teach effectively.  In all honesty, I have no straightforward answers to such questions.  I consider teaching to be a complex process involving many biological and psychological processes for which there is no simple paradigm or schema.  If pressed, I might offer the following as my general overview of teaching but admit that the ideas here are more likely to invite thoughts and dialog on teaching than they are to offer any practical or actionable insights.  As such, I've detailed my thinking on the subject below, but I fully acknowledge that I've been heavily influenced by the work of many scholars and experts as well as my own background in the liberal arts.  In regards to more practical matters such as curriculum design and student evaluation, I feel that quality implementations of these aspects of teaching come about naturally and intuitively when working fully in the space of striving for the qualities I describe below.
    As an educator, I strive to build in students what might best be called deep intuition.  For me, such deep intuition might be described on a practical level, as a metaphysical concept, or as a psychological phenomenon.  I regularly consider all of these aspects as I reflect on my experience and goals as a teacher.  In terms of a practical or functional definition of deep intuition, I believe that deep intuition means having an understanding of a problem or question that enables one to first sense what a good solution or answer looks like and, second, to be able both to conceive of and to follow a path to that desired good result.  This framework raises two obvious questions.  Firstly, how might we characterize what "good" looks like in a given context?  In other words, how can we come to perceive the inherent quality of a given thought process or real world implementation?  Second, how can we actually teach now to perceive and work towards this abstract notion of quality?  
    As for how to define or conceptualize the notion of quality -- the thing that is the goal and grist of deep intuition, I often borrow from Robert Pirsig and his Metaphysics of Quality.  In his schema, quality is akin to the Tao, the whole that cannot be fully comprehended by examination of its constituent parts.  It is that which is known, but cannot be fully spoken of, enumerated, delineated, or dissected.  Yet, quality can be felt, perceived, and implemented.  Interestingly, the essence of this idea finds its way into the everyday parlance of learning.  Those moments when some deep connection or association falls into place for us and we experience a "eureka" moment, we "get it"; we have a new understanding where previously there was disjointed knowledge.  Robert Heinlein's invention of the term "grok" also captures the essence of deep intuition quite well.  By whatever name, deep intuition, groking, the apperception of quality, the idea is the same and, for me, is the central goal of teaching.  Obviously, many similar ideas exist in pedagogical theory.  Concepts such as Bloom's taxonomy and critical thinking embody much the same notion of quality and can serve as practical guides when implementing a curriculum.  
    I feel this concept of quality as I've described it is all well and good, but it can seem excessively abstract and distant from a concrete problem like teaching students how to create computer programs or the like.  So, in less abstract terms, I think about the countless moments when I've reviewed a student's work or listened to them describe a problem, issue, error message, etc. and have been able to instantly perceive what has gone wrong, what might be missing, or where the gap in the student's understanding exists.  I might say that such insightfulness comes from accumulated experience, but I think it would be better to say that that ability comes from my own acquired deep intuition born of experience and quality learning.  I can't say exactly how I know what I know, but I feel that I understand nonetheless and this felt understanding is part of knowing quality.  Most importantly, it is my firm opinion that teaching should always aim to build this type of understanding.  
    If building deep intuition is the goal of quality teaching, how to actually go about it?  For this question, I lean towards two very distinct yet congruent concepts: transition state theory from chemistry and the idea of potential spaces from psychoanalysis.  In broad strokes, chemistry posits how reactions give rise to new substances by imagining an abstract coordinate system with reactants at once extreme and products at the other.  A reaction proceeds from reactants to products through a transition state that is some amalgamation of the two.  The many implementations of chemical bonding theory produce realizations of what this transition state might look like, most often in terms of physical coordinates or thermodynamic properties.  Whatever the case, the idea of transition states is a convenient construct for connecting fundamental physics to observable phenomena.  
    In the sphere of learning, I like to think of a transition state that lies between not-knowing and knowing.  At one extreme, we have reactants that are, in this case, various pieces of knowledge, and at the other extreme, the fuller understanding that is deep intuition.  We may not actually know how we go from one state to another, but it can be helpful to think of a process that connects the two.  Here, this process might invoke the idea of neuroplasticity where environmental stressors activate biological processes that promote the formation and remodeling of neuronal connections.  Our innate sensibilities can tell us when we've achieved a deeper level of understanding (we "get it", we "grok"), but the actual process takes place under a drive for understanding (the stressor) and in the arena of uncertainty that lies between knowing and not-knowing.  
    I would add that it is important to try to relieve the element of anxiety from this transitional process -- students should be expected to struggle, not suffer.  Commensurate with the idea of a transitional state wherein the configuration of a system is necessarily in a higher energy state than at either extreme, going from not-knowing to knowing requires that the brain be in an energized state amenable to the mechanisms of neuroplasticity.  In this model, fear poisons this process, both metaphorically and biologically.  Anxiety is a mental state in which no creative or generative process can happen.  However, if students are able to work from a position of curiosity and not fear, the brain will follow suit and allow itself to be shaped and reconfigured to allow growth and to experience the satisfaction that comes from gaining deep intuition.  This idea follows closely from the ideas of Carol Dweck and other developmental psychologists that focus on what constitutes success in learning.  
    The ideas of deep intuition, transitioning between not-knowing and knowing, and the importance of curiosity are brought together brilliantly by the psychologist/psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott and his idea of potential spaces.  In his early work, Winnicott described how infants use transitional objects (e.g. Teddy bears) as a means of bridging their inner world and outer reality.  He extended this idea to include potential spaces which are arenas of interaction and experience that are between the imaginary and the physical, between fphantasy and reality.  In terms of learning, we can imagine a duality between the inner world of knowledge and concepts and the outer world of tangible results and efforts.  No matter our learning style (visual, kinesthetic, linear, verbal, etc.), we can imagine ourselves turning over, reconfiguring, and juxtaposing our own internal representations of knowledge and comparing them to our understandings of the outer world.  Eventually, our minds will find some configuration of the internal that is congruent with the external and we've reached our "eureka" moment.  This mental process is effectively a form of play.  We can imagine both how our minds play with fundamental building blocks until we grasp how they connect and why anxiety and fear exclude the curiosity and willingness to struggle necessary to make the pieces fit together.  In short, to learn, our minds must not only be free to play with ideas, but must be encouraged and supported as they do so.  Enabling this type of mental play requires attunement to different learning styles and sensibilities and, for me, is the true goal of an educator.
    To summarize, I believe an abstract form of understanding that can be experienced even if cannot be well formulated and I refer to this form of profound, personal, and resonant understanding as "deep intuition".  In this scheme, having deep intuition means being able to perceive the true quality of a proposed solution, process, or line of thought.  I also believe that fostering deep intuition can only be successful in an environment that promotes curiosity and a willingness to play or experiment with ideas.  This belief comes directly from both my own personal learning experiences and my appreciation of key concepts from both neuroscience and psychoanalysis.  In short, we all can perceive quality and we can all learn to work towards deep intuition if we engage with the most transformative and generative aspects of our minds. 
